<iframe src='https://view.officeapps.live.com/op/embed.aspx?src=https://jihulab.com/wxq/docs/-/raw/main/%E6%A8%A1%E5%9D%97%E4%BA%8C/%E5%8D%8E%E5%8C%97%E5%9C%B0%E5%8C%BA-%E5%88%9D%E4%B8%AD.pptx' width='100%' height='534' frameborder='0'>
</iframe>

简介：华北地区，简称华北，是中国地理区划 （China\'s geographical
regionalization）七分之一。在自然地理上一般指秦岭---淮河线以北，长城以南的中国的广大区域。北与东北地区、内蒙古自治区地区相接。大致以≥10℃积温3200℃（西北段为3000℃）等值线、1月平均气温（average
temperature ）-10℃（西北段为-8℃）等值线（the
isoline）为界![](media/image1.png){width="4.936111111111111in"
height="3.3409722222222222in"}

气候climate:我国华北地区主要为温带季风气候(monsoon climate of medium
latitudes)。夏季高温多雨，冬季寒冷干燥(Summer is hot and rainy, winter
is cold and dry)。年平均气温(annual average
temperature)在8～13℃左右。年降水量(annual
precipitation)在400～1000mm左右。内蒙古自治区降水量少于400mm，为半干旱区域。

地理位置和地形Location and
topography：燕山以南，淮河以北，太行山以东，濒临渤海、黄海。地跨冀、鲁、苏、豫、皖、京、津五省二市。我国第二大平原(Second
great plain)，海拔(elevation)多在五十米以下，地形平坦(flat
terrain)。地势特点西高东低(high in the west and low in the east)。

Peking Opera

京剧，又称平剧、京戏等，中国国粹之一，Peking Opera, also known as Ping
Opera and Jing Opera, is one of the quintessence of Chinese
culture.是中国影响最大的戏曲剧种It is the most influential opera in
China，分布地以北京为中心，遍及全国各地Distribution to Beijing as the
center, throughout the country。 ![](media/image2.png){width="4.75in"
height="2.9166666666666665in"}

清代乾隆五十五年（1790年）起，原在南方演出的三庆、四喜、春台、和春
等多以安徽籍艺人为主的四大徽班陆续进入北京，与来自湖北的汉调艺人合作，Beijing
Opera originated from the middle period of the Qing Dynasty (1644-1911).
In the 55th year reigned by the Emperor Qianlong (1790), the most famous
four theatrical troupes in Anhui -- Sanqing Troupe, Sixi Troupe,
Chungong Troupe and Chun Troupe went to Beijing in succession to show
their opera performance and then obtained the unprecedented
success.同时接受了昆曲、秦腔的部分剧目、曲调和表演方法，又吸收了一些地方民间曲调，通过不断的交流、融合，最终形成京剧。
Then, absorbing the essence of the local folk ditty like the \'Kun
Opera\', \'Yiyang Opera\' and \'Shaanxi Opera\' and also mixed with
characteristics of Beijing dialect, Beijing Opera was formed. Although
formed in Beijing, it is not the native-born but a melting opera.

![](media/image3.png){width="2.2979166666666666in"
height="5.0777777777777775in"}

京剧起源于清朝中期(1644-1911)Peking Opera originated in the mid-Qing
Dynasty (1644-1911)

京剧在文学、表演、音乐、舞台美术等各个方面都有一套规范化的艺术表现形式。Everything
about Peking Opera is carefully structured with specific guidelines.
京剧的唱腔属板式变化体，以二簧、西皮为主要声腔。京剧伴奏分文场和武场两大类，文场以胡琴为主奏乐器，武场以鼓板为主。The
stories are of two general types. Civil plays are about emotions and
relationships between characters. They might explore love or mystery.
Martial plays focus on action and are filled with acrobatics and martial
arts.Huqin is the main instrument in the literary field and drum board
is the main instrument in the martial field

![](media/image4.png){width="3.2104166666666667in"
height="1.5805555555555555in"}

京剧的角色分为生、旦、净、丑、杂、武、流等行当There were seven roles in
the early time: Sheng, Dan, Jing, Mo, Chou, Wuhang and Longtao
(Walking-on).
，后三行已不再立专行。各行当都有一套表演程式，唱念做打的技艺各具特色Peking
opera is a performance art incorporating singing, reciting, acting,
martial arts.
。京剧以历史故事为主要演出内容，传统剧目约有一千三百多个，常演的在三四百个以上。

京剧流播全国，影响甚广 spread throughout the country and had a wide
influence.，有"国剧"之称called \"national
opera\"。以梅兰芳命名的京剧表演体系被视为东方戏剧表演体系的代表，为世界三大表演体系之一。The
Peking Opera performance system named after Mei Lanfang is regarded as
the representative of the Oriental opera performance system and one of
the three major performance systems in the
world.京剧是中华民族传统文化的重要表现形式，其中的多种艺术元素被用作中国传统文化的象征符号。Peking
Opera is an important form of expression of Chinese traditional culture,
in which a variety of artistic elements are used as symbols of Chinese
traditional culture. \[1\]

京剧脸谱Face painting

分类classification

红脸含有褒义，代表忠勇；黑脸为中性，代表猛智；蓝脸和绿脸也为中性，代表草莽英雄；黄脸和白脸含贬义，代表凶诈凶恶；金脸和银脸是神秘，代表神妖。
Simply speaking, the red painted-face has the commendatory meaning,
representing allegiance and gallantry; The black painted-face is more
neutral, representing valor and wise; The blue and the green ones are
also neutrality, representing the bold and courageous hero; The yellow
and the white painted-faces has the derogatory meaning, representing
atrocity and duplicity; The golden and the argentite painted-faces are
more mystical, representing god or a monster.

![](media/image5.png){width="3.2784722222222222in"
height="1.6145833333333333in"}

梅兰芳------最杰出的京剧表演艺术家之一，出生在北京一个非常贫困的家庭，8岁学戏，9岁拜吴菱仙为师学青衣，11岁登台。
\[2\]
后又求教于秦稚芬和胡二庚学花旦。1915年4月至1916年9月，新排演了《宦海潮》《牢狱鸳鸯》《思凡》等出戏。50多年来，作为一名京剧演员，他表演了数百个传统戏剧和30多个现代戏剧。他在舞台上塑造了许多生动活泼的女性形象，成为中国京剧乃至整个艺术界的光辉典范。Mei
Lanfang - one of the most remarkable performing artists in Beijing
Opera, was born in Beijing with a family under a very poor circumstance
in childhood. His life was bitter and he had no opportunity to go to
school, so he went to the troupe when he was 8 years old to learn the
Beijing Opera. Mr. Mei mounted the stage when he was 11 years old to
perform the plays of the Beijing Opera. He has been an opera actor for
more than 50 years, performing hundreds of traditional plays and over 30
modern plays. He portrayed many bright and lifelike female figures on
the stage and became the glorious model in Chinese Beijing Opera and
even within the entire artistic circle.

于1949年前先后赴日本、美国、苏联演出，并荣获美国波莫纳学院和南加州大学的荣誉文学博士学位。1950年任中国京剧院院长、1951年，任中国戏曲研究院院长，1953年，任中国戏剧家协会副主席，1959年，加入中国共产党，1961年8月8日，梅兰芳因病在北京逝世。享年67岁。

![](media/image6.png){width="3.172222222222222in"
height="4.3277777777777775in"}

2006年5月，京剧被国务院批准列入第一批国家级非物质文化遗产名录。In May
2006, Peking Opera was approved by The State Council to be included in
the first batch of national intangible cultural heritage list.
2010年，被列入联合国教科文组织非物质文化遗产名录
（名册）人类非物质文化遗产代表名录 Inscribed on the Representative List
of the Intangible Cultural Heritage of Humanity in 2010

Quadrangle

四合院是北京文化的重要载体。an essential carrier of Beijing culture.

北京四合院是北京厚重历史和灿烂地域文化的载体之一。作为几代北京人的主要居住方式，四合院蜚声海内外，具有浓厚的历史底蕴。Quadrangle,
The quadrangle in Beijing is one of the carriers of Beijing\'s massive
history and bright regional culture. As the main residential way of
Beijing people for many generations, the quadrangle is renowned at both
home and abroad. Its fame lies in its long and glorious history.

![](media/image7.png){width="4.65in" height="2.95625in"}

早在3000年前商朝(公元前16世纪至公元前11世纪)的古都，就有一些围绕庭院的房屋建筑工程。整齐的四合院出现在西周(公元前11世纪-公元前771年)。自元朝(1271
\~
1368年)北京正式建都以来，元朝进行了大规模的城市建设，四合院、宫殿、衙门、街区、胡同和胡同都在这一时期同时建造。但现存的大多数四合院建于清朝(1644-1911)至20世纪30年代。四合院的要求是将宗法制度与封建社会和谐地结合起来，这是几百年来北京的传统居住方式。Early
in the ancient capital city of the Shang Dynasty (16th-11th century BC)
3,000 years ago, there were several housing construction projects
surrounding the courtyard on the old site of the royal court and palace.
The quadrangle in neat formation appeared in Western Zhou Dynasty (11th
century BC-771 BC). Since Beijing was formally founded as the capital in
the Yuan Dynasty (1271--1368) and Yuan constructed the city cosmically,
the quadrangle, palace, yamun, block, alley and Hutong were all built
simultaneously during that time. But most of the quadrangles existing
today were constructed from the Qing Dynasty (1644-1911) to the 1930s. A
requirement of the quadrangle was to harmoniously combine the
patriarchal clan system into feudal society and it has been the
traditional residential way of Beijing for hundreds of years.

Why call it \'quadrangle\'?
这是因为整个建筑的每个方向都有一个房子:东、西、南、北。这四个房子(正房(北房)，正房(南房)，东厢房和西厢房)围绕着四合院，形成一个中央庭院，像一个口(中文)字形。因此这种庭院类型的住宅被称为"四合院"。布局有序，庭院明亮，让人感觉更加优雅舒适;不同阶级的家庭成员是分离开的，有单独的住宿空间，四合院的外墙构成了胡同的侧壁。This
is because each direction of the entire construction has a house: east,
west, south and north. These four houses (The main room (north room),
the converse room (south room), the east wing-room and west wing-room)
encircle the courtyard on all four sides forming a central courtyard
which resembles a mouth (Kou in Chinese) glyph. Therefore this courtyard
type of residence is called \'quadrangle\'. The layout is orderly and
the courtyard is bright, so you may feel more elegant and comfortable;
both senior and junior family members are organized and able to occupy
their own rooms respectively. The outer walls of the quadrangle compose
the side wall of Hutong.

![](media/image8.png){width="4.800694444444445in"
height="2.9402777777777778in"}

四合院是胡同的主要建筑，以其独特的特色而闻名。四合院的结构具有一种神秘的美，在中国传统民居建筑中是如此的典型和代表性。四合院是安全和私密的，因为只有一个前门面向外面;当关上门的时候，你会有自己的生活空间，非常私密，非常适合居住。它就像一个"盒子"，但为什么要做这个盒子呢?因为对于北京人来说，理想的房子是"一个单独的房子，有自己的入口和庭院，有一个独立的家"。Quadrangle
is the main construction of Hutong and is so famous for its unique
features. The structure of the quadrangle has a kind of mystical beauty,
which is so typical and representative in traditional Chinese
residential buildings. The quadrangle is secure and private since there
is only one front gate facing outside; when closing the gate, you will
have your own living place which is very private and quite suitable for
living in. It is like a \'box\' but why make this box? Because the ideal
house for Beijing\'s people is \'a single house which has its own
entrance and courtyard for only a single family\'.

四合院从图案、设计和传统上都很容易辨认。The quadrangle is very
recognizable from its pattern, design and
tradition.它的结构由前门、屏风墙、交谈室、主室和厢房组成。 Its
construction consists of a front door, screen wall, converse room,
principle room and wing-rooms.
大多数四合院分为内院和外院。内庭院包括主室、侧室和厢房，厢房是主要的生活空间，外庭院则是门房、客厅和客房。Most
of the quadrangles are divided into two courtyards: inner and outer. The
inner courtyard includes the main room, side room and wing-room which is
the main living space while the outer one serves as the gatehouse,
living room and guest room.
所有的房子都只有一层。对于住在四合院的人来说，也有严格的规定:正房大、采光好、通风良好;孩子和次要的家庭成员应该住在厢房。All
the houses are only one floor. There is also a strict rule for people to
live in the rooms of the quadrangle: The main room is big, well lit and
ventilated for the elders; the children and junior family members should
live in the
wing-rooms.为了充分利用自然采光，四合院一般朝南，正门往往开在东南角而不是中间位置。整个北京城就像一个扩大了的四合院，在东西南北四个方向上基本对称。北京的布局严谨而明确，形成了一幅气势磅礴的景象。
In order to take advantage of the natural lighting, the quadrangle
generally faces south, and the front gate often opens in the southeast
corner but not the middle position. The whole city of Beijing is similar
to an enlarged-sized quadrangle that is basically symmetrical in the
four directions of east, west, north and south. Beijing\'s layout is so
rigorous and well-defined that it makes an imposing and magnificent
sight.

四合院，典型的北京人的庭院Quadrangles, typical courtyards of Beijingers

北京四合院中有许多象征性的人物，如外面的屏风、门鼓、门夹，以及室内的装饰，如挂门、游廊。在庭院中，人物是综合性的:动物、植物、器物、祈祷、神等。There
are many symbolic figures in Beijing\'s quadrangle, such as the screen
wall, gate drum, gate hairpin located outside as well as indoor
decorations like swag gate and verandas. In the courtyard, the figures
are comprehensive: animal, plant, utensil, invocation, deity and so on.

北京的四合院，是中国古代劳动人民精心创造的一种居住方式，为中国历史留下了极其丰富的遗产。随着数百年来人们的维护，四合院在人们心中留下了非常深刻的印象。Beijing\'s
quadrangle, a kind of residential way carefully created by the working
people in ancient times, has left behind an extremely rich inheritance
to China\'s history. Along with people\'s rehabilitation for hundreds of
years, the quadrangle has made a very profound impression in people\'s
minds.
