新中国成立与改革开放

<iframe src='https://view.officeapps.live.com/op/embed.aspx?src=https://jihulab.com/wxq/docs/-/raw/main/%E6%A8%A1%E5%9D%97%E4%B8%80/9%E6%96%B0%E4%B8%AD%E5%9B%BD%E6%88%90%E7%AB%8B%E4%B8%8E%E6%94%B9%E9%9D%A9%E5%BC%80%E6%94%BE%20%E5%B0%8F%E5%AD%A6%E9%83%A8%E5%88%86.pptx' width='100%' height='534' frameborder='0'>
</iframe>

1949年10月1日下午3时，中华人民共和国开国大典在北京隆重举行。毛泽东站在天安门城楼上，向全世界庄严宣告："中华人民共和国中央人民政府今天成立了！＂顿时，天安门广场三十多万群众欢声雷动。伴着《义勇军进行曲》的雄壮旋律，中华人民共和国国旗------五星红旅冉冉升起。北京沸腾了，中国沸腾了！中国人从此站起来了！中国共产党人在夺取全国政权以后，开始按照自己的理想建设全新的社会政治制度，一个新的时代开始了。

The founding of the People\'s Republic of China on Oct 1, 1949, allowed
the Chinese people to stand upright and become the true masters of the
country. The Communist Party of China (CPC) became the ruling party that
leads the people in exercising State power.

1949年10月1日，中华人民共和国成立，中国人民从此站立起来、当家做主，真正成为新国家新社会的主人。中国共产党成为领导人民掌握全国政权的执政党。

新中国成立历史意义：

1.  意味着中国人民经过一百多年的英勇斗争，终于推翻了帝国主义、封建主义和官僚资本主义的统治，取得新民主主义革命的胜利，中国人民从此站起来了，成了国家的主人。中国历史进入了一个新纪元。

2.  标志着中国从此走上了独立、民主、统一的道路，开始了向社会主义过渡的新时期。

3.  作为占世界人口近四分之一的大国，冲破了帝国主义的东方战线，壮大了世界和平、民主和社会主义的力量，鼓舞了世界被压迫民族和被压迫人民争取解放的斗争。

    经过二十八年浴血奋斗，党领导人民，在各民主党派和无党派民主人士积极合作下，于一九四九年十月一日宣告成立中华人民共和国，实现民族独立、人民解放，彻底结束了旧中国半殖民地半封建社会的历史，彻底结束了极少数剥削者统治广大劳动人民的历史，彻底结束了旧中国一盘散沙的局面，彻底废除了列强强加给中国的不平等条约和帝国主义在中国的一切特权，实现了中国从几千年封建专制政治向人民民主的伟大飞跃，也极大改变了世界政治格局，鼓舞了全世界被压迫民族和被压迫人民争取解放的斗争。

    On October 1, 1949, the founding of the People's Republic of China
    was proclaimed after 28 years of bitter and courageous struggle
    carried out by the people under the leadership of the Party and with
    the active support of other political parties and democrats without
    party affiliation, thus realizing the independence of the Chinese
    nation and the liberation of the Chinese people. This put an end to
    China's history as a semi-colonial, semi-feudal society, to the rule
    of a handful of exploiters over the working people, to the state of
    total disunity that plagued the old China, and to all the unequal
    treaties imposed on our country by foreign powers and all the
    privileges that imperialist powers enjoyed on our land, marking the
    country's great transformation from a millennia-old feudal autocracy
    to a people's democracy. This also reshaped the world political
    landscape and offered enormous inspiration for oppressed nations and
    peoples struggling for liberation around the world.

    实践充分说明，历史和人民选择了中国共产党，没有中国共产党领导，民族独立、人民解放是不可能实现的。中国共产党和中国人民以英勇顽强的奋斗向世界庄严宣告，中国人民从此站起来了，中华民族任人宰割、饱受欺凌的时代一去不复返了，中国发展从此开启了新纪元。

    It has been proven through practice that history and the people have
    chosen the Communist Party of China, and that without its
    leadership, it would not have been possible to realize national
    independence and the people's liberation. Through tenacious
    struggle, the Party and the people showed the world that the Chinese
    people had stood up and the time in which the Chinese nation could
    be bullied and abused was gone and would never return. This marked
    the beginning of a new epoch in China's development.

政治协商制度的形成：

随着人民解放战争的胜利发展，中国共产党团结各民主党派和无党派民主人士，开始

筹建新中国的工作。

1949年9月，中国人民政治协商会议第一届全体会议在北平隆重举行。中国共产党、各民主党派、无党派爱国民主人士、人民解放军、各人民团体、各地区、各民族以及海外华侨的代表出席大会。

大会通过了《中国人民政治协商会议共同纲领》。

共同纲领规定，中华人民共和国是新民主主义即人民民主主义的国家，实行以工人阶级领导的、以工农联盟为基础的、团结各民主阶级和国内各民族的人民民主专政；

还规定了国家各个方面的基本方针和政策。

中国人民政治协商会议暂时代行将来召开的全国人民代表大会的职能。共同纲领确立了中国历史上一个新型国家的架构，具有临时宪法的性质。

大会选举产生了中央人民政府委员会，毛泽东当选为主席，朱德、刘少奇、宋庆龄等为副主席。

会议决定改北平为北京，为新中国的首都，以五星红旗为国旗，《义勇军进行曲》为代国歌，采用公元纪年。

中央人民政府委员会还任命周恩来为政务院总理兼外交部长。

1949年10月1日，中华人民共和国成立，新中国诞生了。

中国人民政治协商会议的成功召开，初步建立了中国共产党领导的多党合作和政治协商制度。1954年，全国人民代表大会召开后，中国人民政治协商会议不再代行全国人民代表大会职权，但政协作为统一战线组织继续存在，成为各民主党派和爱国民主人士参政、议政的舞台。它的主要职能是政治协商和民主监督。

1956年，中国共产党提出与民主党派实行["长期共存，互相监督"]{.underline}的方针，受到各民主党派的热烈拥护。中国共产党广泛吸收各民主党派和各界爱国人士参政议政，组成最广泛的爱国统一战线。中国共产党领导的多党合作和政治协商制度发展到一个新阶段。

"究竟是一个党好，还是几个党好？现在看未，恐怕是几个党好。不但过去如此，而且将来也可以如此，就是长期共存，互相监督·......共产党可以监督民主党派，民主党派也可以监督共产党。为什么要让民主党派监督共产党呢？这是因为一个党同一个人一样，耳边很需要听到不同的声音。"

------毛泽东《论十大关系）

人民代表大会制度的创立：

《中国人民政治协商会议共同纲领》规定：

-   人民行使国家政权的机关------各级人民代表大会和各级人民政府。

-   各级人民代表大会由人民普选方法产生。

-   国家最高权力机关------全国人民代表大会。

    随着新中国经济建设的大规模展开，召开人民代表大会的时机日益成熟。

在全国人民普选的基础上，1954年9月，第一届全国人民代表大会在北京隆重举行。大会通过了《中华人民共和国宪法》。宪法规定，中华人民共和国全国人民代表大会是最高国家权力机关。这就以国家大法的形式确定了人民代表大会制度。

宪法体现了人民民主和社会主义两大原则，是新中国第一部社会主义类型的宪法。

大会选举毛泽东为中华人民共和国主席，朱德为副主席，刘少奇为全国人大常委会委员长。大会决定任命周恩来为国务院总理。

第一届全国人民代表大会的召开，基本形成了人民代表大会制度。人民代表大会制度是中国的根本政治制度，为民主政治建设奠定了基础。

民族区域自治制度的建立：

中国是由56个民族组成的统一的多民族国家。为了实现民族平等、民族团结和各民族共同繁荣，共同纲领明确规定，在"各少数民族聚居的地区，应实行民族的区域自治"。1954

年宪法正式确认，民族区城自治制度为中国的一项基本政治制度。

民族区域自治，就是在中央政府的统一领导下，各少数民族聚居的地区设立自治区城和自治机关，由当地民族当家作主，管理本民族地方性的内部事务，行使自治权利。1947年，内蒙古自治区成立。后来，新中国共成立了五个自治区、一百多个自治县（旗），满足了少数民族自己当家作主的愿望，实现了民族平等，也保证了祖国统一和民族团结。

1965年，西藏自治区第一届人民代表大会在拉萨隆重举行，会上正式成立西藏自治区。

补充：新疆维吾尔自治区（1955.10.1）

广西壮族自治区（1958.3.15）

宁夏回族自治区（1958.10.25）

总书记谈新中国成立与改革开放：

"如果没有一九七八年我们党果断决定实行改革开放，并坚定不移推进改革开放，坚定不移把握改革开放的正确方向，社会主义中国就不可能有今天这样的大好局面，就可能面临严重危机，就可能遇到像苏联、东欧国家那样的亡党亡国危机。同时，如果没有一九四九年建立新中国并进行社会主义革命和建设，积累了重要的思想、物质、制度条件，积累了正反两方面经验，改革开放也很难顺利推进。"

------二〇一三年一月五日在新进中央委员会的委员、候补委员学习贯彻党的十八大精神研讨班上讲话

<http://www.qstheory.cn/zhuanqu/2021-04/21/c_1127357119.htm> 求是网

从新中国成立到改革开放的几个历史阶段：

1.  1949-1956年 过渡时期

    我国的过渡时期是指1949------1956年，过渡时期又分为两个阶段：（一）1949------1952年，是国民经济的恢复和初步发展时期，（二）1953------1956年，是社会主义工业化和三大改造时期。

    中国过渡时期总路线1953年制定，社会主义建设与改造并举，也就是三大改造和一五计划。到1956年底，国家基本上完成了对农业、手工业和资本主义工商业的社会主义改造，实现了把生产资料私有制转变为社会主义公有制的任务。我国初步建立起社会主义的基本制度，从此，进入社会主义初级阶段。

    过渡时期的革命对象为资产阶级，革命阶级是社会主义革命。

    新中国成立后，党领导人民战胜政治、经济、军事等方面一系列严峻挑战，肃清国民党反动派残余武装力量和土匪，和平解放西藏，实现祖国大陆完全统一；稳定物价，统一财经工作，完成土地改革，进行社会各方面民主改革，实行男女权利平等，镇压反革命，开展"三反"、"五反"运动，荡涤旧社会留下的污泥浊水，社会面貌焕然一新。中国人民志愿军雄赳赳、气昂昂跨过鸭绿江，同朝鲜人民和军队并肩战斗，战胜武装到牙齿的强敌，打出了国威军威，打出了中国人民的精气神，赢得抗美援朝战争伟大胜利，捍卫了新中国安全，彰显了新中国大国地位。新中国在错综复杂的国内国际环境中站稳了脚跟。

    After the founding of the People's Republic, the Party led the
    people in surmounting a multitude of political, economic, and
    military challenges. It cleared out bandits and remnant KMT
    reactionary forces, peacefully liberated Tibet, and unified the
    entire mainland. It stabilized prices, unified standards for
    finances and the economy, completed the agrarian reform, and
    launched democratic reforms in all sectors of society. It introduced
    the policy of equal rights for men and women, suppressed
    counter-revolutionaries, and launched　movements against the "three
    evils" of corruption, waste, and bureaucracy and against the "five
    evils" of bribery, tax evasion, theft of state property, cheating on
    government contracts, and stealing of economic information. As the
    stains of the old society were wiped out, China took on a completely
    new look.

    Meanwhile, the Chinese People's Volunteers marched valiantly across
    the Yalu River to fight alongside the Korean people and troops. They
    ultimately defeated a powerful enemy that was armed to the teeth,
    demonstrating the gallantry of our army and our country, and the
    unyielding spirit of our people. China's resounding victory in the
    War to Resist US Aggression and Aid Korea safeguarded the security
    of the nascent People's Republic, and testified to its status as a
    major country. The new China thus gained a firm foothold amid
    complex domestic and international environments.

2.  1956-1966年，全面建设社会主义时期。

    党的七大以后，中国社会发生了一系列深刻的变化。全国人民在党的领导下，建立了中华人民共和国；到1956年上半年，全国绝大部分地区基本上完成了对生产资料私有制的社会主义改造，一个崭新的社会主义制度从此在中国建立起来。与此同时，第一个五年计划的许多重要指标已有确实把握提前完成。在这种形势下，为了加强执政党的建设,
    探索中国社会主义建设的道路，制定党在新形势下的路线、方针、政策，中共中央决定召开第八次全国代表大会。

    1956年4月25日，毛泽东在中央政治局扩大会议上作了《论十大关系》的讲话，为探索适合中国国情的社会主义建设道路提出了许多重要的思想原则，从思想上、理论上为八大的召开作了重要的准备。

    党领导建立和巩固工人阶级领导的、以工农联盟为基础的人民民主专政的国家政权，为国家迅速发展创造了条件。Under
    the Party's leadership, a government of people's democratic
    dictatorship was established and consolidated, which was led by the
    working class and based on an alliance of workers and peasants. This
    created the conditions necessary for the country's rapid
    development.

    一九四九年，中国人民政治协商会议第一届全体会议制定《中国人民政治协商会议共同纲领》。一九五三年，党正式提出过渡时期的总路线，即在一个相当长的时期内，逐步实现国家的社会主义工业化，并逐步实现国家对农业、手工业和资本主义工商业的社会主义改造。一九五四年，召开第一届全国人民代表大会第一次会议，通过了《中华人民共和国宪法》。一九五六年，我国基本上完成对生产资料私有制的社会主义改造，基本上实现生产资料公有制和按劳分配，建立起社会主义经济制度。

    In 1949, the Common Program of the Chinese People's Political
    Consultative Conference (CPPCC) was passed at the CPPCC's first
    plenary session. In 1953, the Party officially set forth the general
    line for the transition period, namely gradually realizing the
    country's socialist industrialization and socialist transformation
    of agriculture, handicrafts, and capitalist industry and commerce
    over a fairly long period of time. In 1954, the Constitution of the
    People's Republic of China was adopted at the first session of the
    First National People's Congress. In 1956, China basically completed
    the socialist transformation of private ownership of the means of
    production, and put into practice public ownership of the means of
    production and distribution according to work, thus marking the
    establishment of the socialist economic system.

    党领导确立人民代表大会制度、中国共产党领导的多党合作和政治协商制度、民族区域自治制度，为人民当家作主提供了制度保证。党领导实现和巩固了全国各族人民的大团结，形成和发展各民族平等互助的社会主义民族关系，实现和巩固全国工人、农民、知识分子和其他各阶层人民的大团结，加强和扩大了广泛统一战线。社会主义制度的建立，为我国一切进步和发展奠定了重要基础。

    Under the Party's leadership, China established the system of
    people's congresses, the system of CPC-led multiparty cooperation
    and political consultation, and the system of regional ethnic
    autonomy, providing institutional guarantees for ensuring that it is
    the people who run the country. Under the Party's leadership, China
    also forged and strengthened unity among people of all ethnic
    groups, established and developed socialist ethnic relations based
    on equality and mutual assistance, and achieved and cemented unity
    between workers, peasants, intellectuals, and people from other
    social strata across the country. As a result, a broad united front
    was consolidated and expanded. The establishment of the socialist
    system laid the foundation for all of China's subsequent progress
    and development.

    1956年9月15日－27日，中国共产党第八次全国代表大会在北京举行。党的八大将包括现代化的工业、农业、交通运输业和国防在内的四个现代化目标写入大会通过的党章，还首次把"各尽所能，按劳取酬"的分配原则写进党章。

    The 8th National Congress of the Communist Party of China (CPC) was
    held in Beijing from Sept 15 to 27, 1956. The main task of \"four
    modernizations\" in industry, agriculture, transportation and
    national defense sectors was added to the Party Constitution passed
    by the congress, as well as the inclusion for the first time of the
    principle on income distribution \-- each doing his best and getting
    paid according to his contribution.

    社会主义革命和建设时期，党面临的主要任务是，实现从新民主主义到社会主义的转变，进行社会主义革命，推进社会主义建设，为实现中华民族伟大复兴奠定根本政治前提和制度基础。In
    the period of socialist revolution and construction, the main tasks
    of the Party were to realize the transformation from new democracy
    to socialism, carry out socialist revolution, promote socialist
    construction, and lay down the fundamental political conditions and
    the institutional foundations necessary for national rejuvenation.

党的八大根据我国社会主义改造基本完成后的形势，提出国内主要矛盾已经不再是工人阶级和资产阶级的矛盾，而是人民对于经济文化迅速发展的需要同当前经济文化不能满足人民需要的状况之间的矛盾，全国人民的主要任务是集中力量发展社会生产力，实现国家工业化，逐步满足人民日益增长的物质和文化需要。党提出努力把我国逐步建设成为一个具有现代农业、现代工业、现代国防和现代科学技术的社会主义强国，领导人民开展全面的大规模的社会主义建设。In
light of the domestic situation following socialist transformation, the
Party propounded at its Eighth National Congress that the main
contradiction in China was no longer the contradiction between the
working class and the bourgeoisie, but rather that between the demand of
the people for rapid economic and cultural development and the reality
that the country's economy and culture fell short of the needs of the
people. Therefore, the major task facing the nation was to concentrate
on developing the productive forces and realize industrialization in
order to gradually meet the people's growing material and cultural
needs. The Party called on the people to redouble their efforts to build
China step by step into a strong socialist country with modern
agriculture, industry, national defense, and science and technology, and
it led them in carrying out large-scale socialist construction across
the board.

经过实施几个五年计划，我国建立起独立的比较完整的工业体系和国民经济体系，农业生产条件显著改变，教育、科学、文化、卫生、体育事业有很大发展。"两弹一星"等国防尖端科技不断取得突破，国防工业从无到有逐步发展起来。人民解放军得到壮大和提高，由单一的陆军发展成为包括海军、空军和其他技术兵种在内的合成军队，为巩固新生人民政权、确立中国大国地位、维护中华民族尊严提供了坚强后盾。

Through the execution of several five-year plans, an independent and
relatively complete industrial system and national economic framework
were established, the conditions of agricultural production were
markedly improved, and impressive progress was made in social programs
such as education, science, culture, health, and sports. With continuous
breakthroughs in cutting-edge technologies, including nuclear weapons,
missiles, and satellites, China's defense industries underwent steady
growth after starting from scratch. The People's Liberation Army
continued to grow in strength, expanding from ground forces alone into a
composite military force comprised of the navy, air force, and other
specialized units. This provided firm support for the People's Republic
to consolidate the newborn people's government, establish China's
position as a major country, and defend the nation's dignity.

党坚持独立自主的和平外交政策，倡导和坚持和平共处五项原则，坚定维护国家独立、主权、尊严，支持和援助世界被压迫民族解放事业、新独立国家建设事业和各国人民正义斗争，反对帝国主义、霸权主义、殖民主义、种族主义，彻底结束了旧中国的屈辱外交。党审时度势调整外交战略，推动恢复我国在联合国的一切合法权利，打开对外工作新局面，推动形成国际社会坚持一个中国原则的格局。党提出划分三个世界的战略，作出中国永远不称霸的庄严承诺，赢得国际社会特别是广大发展中国家尊重和赞誉。

The Party adhered to an independent foreign policy of peace, championed
and upheld the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence, and firmly
defended China's independence, sovereignty, and dignity. It provided
support and assistance for other oppressed nations in seeking
liberation, for newly independent countries in their pursuit of
development, and for various peoples as they put up just struggles, and
stood opposed to imperialism, hegemonism, colonialism, and racism. The
humiliating diplomacy of the old China was put to an end.

The Party adjusted its diplomatic strategies in light of evolving
circumstances, worked to restore all lawful rights of the People's
Republic of China in the United Nations, opened up new horizons for
China's diplomacy, and fostered commitment to the one-China principle
among the international community. The Party put forward the theory of
the differentiation of the three worlds and made the promise that China
would never seek hegemony, earning respect and acclaim from the
international community and developing countries in particular.

党充分预见到在全国执政面临的新挑战，早在解放战争取得全国胜利前夕召开的党的七届二中全会就向全党提出，务必继续保持谦虚、谨慎、不骄、不躁的作风，务必继续保持艰苦奋斗的作风。新中国成立后，党着重提出执政条件下党的建设的重大课题，从思想上组织上作风上加强党的建设、巩固党的领导。党加强干部理论学习和知识培训，提高党的领导水平，要求全党特别是党的高级干部增强维护党的团结统一的自觉性。党开展整风整党，加强党内教育，整顿基层党组织，提高党员条件，反对官僚主义、命令主义和贪污浪费。党高度警惕并着力防范党员干部腐化变质，坚决惩治腐败。这些重要举措，增强了党的纯洁性和全党的团结，密切了党同人民群众的联系，积累了执政党建设的初步经验。

The Party fully foresaw the new challenges it would face after assuming
power over the whole country. As early as at the second plenary session
of its Seventh Central Committee which was held shortly before
nationwide victory was attained in the War of Liberation, the Party
called on all members to remain modest, prudent, and free from arrogance
and rashness in their work, and to preserve the style of plain living
and hard struggle. After the founding of the People's Republic, the
Party focused on the major issue of Party building in the context of
governing, and worked to strengthen the Party and consolidate Party
leadership ideologically, organizationally, and in terms of conduct. The
Party bolstered efforts to encourage officials to study theory and
increase their knowledge, improved its capacity for exercising
leadership, and demanded that all members, especially high-ranking
officials, act with a greater sense of purpose to safeguard Party unity
and solidarity. Rectification campaigns were carried out throughout the
Party to strengthen education within the Party, consolidate
primary-level organizations, raise membership requirements, and oppose
bureaucratism, commandism, graft, and waste. The Party was on high alert
against corruption, worked hard to prevent degeneracy among officials,
and responded to corruption with firm punishment. These important
measures strengthened the integrity of the Party and the solidarity of
all Party members, built closer ties between the Party and the people,
and accumulated essential starting experience for building a governing
party.

在这个时期，毛泽东同志提出把马克思列宁主义基本原理同中国具体实际进行"第二次结合"，以毛泽东同志为主要代表的中国共产党人，结合新的实际丰富和发展毛泽东思想，提出关于社会主义建设的一系列重要思想，包括社会主义社会是一个很长的历史阶段，严格区分和正确处理敌我矛盾和人民内部矛盾，正确处理我国社会主义建设的十大关系，走出一条适合我国国情的工业化道路，尊重价值规律，在党与民主党派的关系上实行"长期共存、互相监督"的方针，在科学文化工作中实行"百花齐放、百家争鸣"的方针等。这些独创性理论成果至今仍有重要指导意义。

During this period, Comrade Mao Zedong proposed a second round of
efforts to integrate the basic tenets of Marxism-Leninism with China's
realities. Chinese communists, with Comrade Mao Zedong as their chief
representative, enriched and developed Mao Zedong Thought by taking
stock of new realities, and put forward a series of important theories
for socialist construction. These included recognizing that socialist
society was a long historical period; strictly differentiating between
two types of contradictions, namely those between the people and the
enemy and those among the people, and properly dealing with these
contradictions; handling the ten major relationships in China's
socialist construction appropriately; finding a path to
industrialization suited to China's realities; respecting the law of
value; implementing the principle of long-term coexistence and mutual
oversight between the Communist Party and other political parties; and
applying the principle of letting a hundred flowers blossom and a
hundred schools of thought contend to scientific and cultural work.
These creative theoretical achievements maintain important guiding
significance to this day.

毛泽东思想是马克思列宁主义在中国的创造性运用和发展，是被实践证明了的关于中国革命和建设的正确的理论原则和经验总结，是马克思主义中国化的第一次历史性飞跃。毛泽东思想的活的灵魂是贯穿于各个组成部分的立场、观点、方法，体现为实事求是、群众路线、独立自主三个基本方面，为党和人民事业发展提供了科学指引。

Mao Zedong Thought represents a creative application and advancement of
Marxism-Leninism in China. It is a summation of theories, principles,
and experience on China's revolution and construction that has been
proven correct through practice, and its establishment marked the first
historic step in adapting Marxism to the Chinese context. The living
soul of Mao Zedong Thought is the positions, viewpoints, and methods
embodied in its constituent parts, which are reflected in three basic
points---seeking truth from facts, following the mass line, and staying
independent. These have provided sound guidance for developing the cause
of the Party and the people.

四、1966-1976年，文革十年动乱时期。

遗憾的是，党的八大形成的正确路线未能完全坚持下去，先后出现"大跃进"运动、人民公社化运动等错误，反右派斗争也被严重扩大化。面对当时严峻复杂的外部环境，党极为关注社会主义政权巩固，为此进行了多方面努力。然而，毛泽东同志在关于社会主义社会阶级斗争的理论和实践上的错误发展得越来越严重，党中央未能及时纠正这些错误。毛泽东同志对当时我国阶级形势以及党和国家政治状况作出完全错误的估计，发动和领导了"文化大革命"，林彪、江青两个反革命集团利用毛泽东同志的错误，进行了大量祸国殃民的罪恶活动，酿成十年内乱，使党、国家、人民遭到新中国成立以来最严重的挫折和损失，教训极其惨痛。一九七六年十月，中央政治局执行党和人民的意志，毅然粉碎了"四人帮"，结束了"文化大革命"这场灾难。

Regrettably, the correct line adopted at the Party's Eighth National
Congress was not fully upheld. Mistakes were made such as the Great Leap
Forward and the people's commune movement, and the scope of the struggle
against Rightists was also made far too broad. Confronted with a grave
and complex external environment at the time, the Party was extremely
concerned about consolidating China's socialist state power, and made a
wide range of efforts in this regard. However, Comrade Mao Zedong's
theoretical and practical errors concerning class struggle in a
socialist society became increasingly serious, and the Central Committee
failed to rectify these mistakes in good time. Under a completely
erroneous appraisal of the prevailing class relations and the political
situation in the Party and the country, Comrade Mao Zedong launched and
led the Cultural Revolution. The counter-revolutionary cliques of Lin
Biao and Jiang Qing took advantage of Comrade Mao Zedong's mistakes, and
committed many crimes that brought disaster to the country and the
people, resulting in ten years of domestic turmoil which caused the
Party, the country, and the people to suffer the most serious losses and
setbacks since the founding of the People's Republic. This was an
extremely bitter lesson. Acting on the will of the Party and the people,
the Political Bureau of the Central Committee resolutely smashed the
Gang of Four in October 1976, putting an end to the catastrophic
Cultural Revolution.

从新中国成立到改革开放前夕，党领导人民完成社会主义革命，消灭一切剥削制度，实现了中华民族有史以来最为广泛而深刻的社会变革，实现了一穷二白、人口众多的东方大国大步迈进社会主义社会的伟大飞跃。在探索过程中，虽然经历了严重曲折，但党在社会主义革命和建设中取得的独创性理论成果和巨大成就，为在新的历史时期开创中国特色社会主义提供了宝贵经验、理论准备、物质基础。

From the founding of the People's Republic to the eve of reform and
opening up, the Party led the people in completing the socialist
revolution, eliminating all systems of exploitation, and bringing about
the most extensive and profound social change in the history of the
Chinese nation and a great transformation from a poor and backward
Eastern country with a large population to a socialist country. Despite
the serious setbacks it encountered in the process of exploration, the
Party made creative theoretical achievements and great progress in
socialist revolution and construction, which provided valuable
experience, theoretical preparation, and material foundations for
launching socialism with Chinese characteristics into a new historical
period.

中国共产党和中国人民以英勇顽强的奋斗向世界庄严宣告，中国人民不但善于破坏一个旧世界、也善于建设一个新世界，只有社会主义才能救中国，只有社会主义才能发展中国。

Through tenacious struggle, the Party and the people showed the world
that the Chinese people were not only capable of dismantling the old
world, but also of building a new one, that only socialism could save
China, and that only socialism could develop China.

五、1976-1978年，在徘徊中前进。

改革开放和社会主义现代化建设新时期，党面临的主要任务是，继续探索中国建设社会主义的正确道路，解放和发展社会生产力，使人民摆脱贫困、尽快富裕起来，为实现中华民族伟大复兴提供充满新的活力的体制保证和快速发展的物质条件。

In the new period of reform, opening up, and socialist modernization,
the main tasks facing the Party were to continue exploring a right path
for building socialism in China, unleash and develop the productive
forces, lift the people out of poverty and help them become prosperous
in the shortest time possible, and fuel the push toward national
rejuvenation by providing new, dynamic institutional guarantees as well
as the material conditions for rapid development.

"文化大革命"结束以后，在党和国家面临何去何从的重大历史关头，党深刻认识到，只有实行改革开放才是唯一出路，否则我们的现代化事业和社会主义事业就会被葬送。一九七八年十二月，党召开十一届三中全会，果断结束"以阶级斗争为纲"，实现党和国家工作中心战略转移，开启了改革开放和社会主义现代化建设新时期，实现了新中国成立以来党的历史上具有深远意义的伟大转折。党作出彻底否定"文化大革命"的重大决策。四十多年来，党始终不渝坚持这次全会确立的路线方针政策。

After the end of the Cultural Revolution, the Party stood at a crucial
historical juncture in which it was confronted with the question of
which course the Party and the country should take. The Party came to
recognize that the only way forward was to launch a program of reform
and opening up; otherwise, our endeavors in pursuing modernization and
building socialism would be doomed to failure. In December 1978, the
11th Central Committee held its third plenary session. At the session
the Party decisively abandoned the policy of taking class struggle as
the key link, and initiated a strategic shift in the focus of the Party
and country's work, thereby ushering in a new period of reform, opening
up, and socialist modernization. This marked a great turning point of
far-reaching significance in the Party's history since the founding of
the People's Republic of China. The Party also made the momentous
decision to completely renounce the Cultural Revolution. Over the more
than 40 years that have passed since then, the Party has never wavered
in following the line, principles, and policies adopted at this session.

为了推进改革开放，党重新确立马克思主义的思想路线、政治路线、组织路线，彻底否定"两个凡是"的错误方针，正确评价毛泽东同志的历史地位和毛泽东思想的科学体系。党明确我国社会的主要矛盾是人民日益增长的物质文化需要同落后的社会生产之间的矛盾，解决这个主要矛盾就是我们的中心任务，提出小康社会目标。In
order to promote reform and opening up, the Party re-established the
Marxist ideological, political, and organizational lines, thoroughly
refuted the erroneous "two whatevers" policy, and correctly appraised
the historical position of Comrade Mao Zedong and the value of Mao
Zedong Thought as a scientific system. The Party made it clear that the
principal contradiction in Chinese society was that China's
underdeveloped social production was unable to meet the ever-growing
material and cultural needs of the people, and hence the central task of
the Party was to resolve this contradiction. On this basis, the Party
put forward the goal of building China into a moderately prosperous
society.

党在各方面工作中恢复并制定一系列正确政策，调整国民经济。党领导全面开展思想、政治、组织等领域拨乱反正，大规模平反冤假错案和调整社会关系。党制定《关于建国以来党的若干历史问题的决议》，标志着党在指导思想上的拨乱反正胜利完成。

The Party restored and formulated a series of correct policies in all
fields of work, and began the process of readjusting the national
economy. Under the leadership of the Party, comprehensive steps were
taken to set things right ideologically, politically, and
organizationally, and extensive efforts were made to redress wrongs
suffered by those who were unjustly, falsely, and wrongly accused and to
regulate social relations. The adoption of the Resolution on Certain
Questions in the History of Our Party since the Founding of the People's
Republic of China marked the successful conclusion of the Party's
efforts to rectify its guiding principles.

六、1978至今 改革开放

党的十一届三中全会以后，以邓小平同志为主要代表的中国共产党人，团结带领全党全国各族人民，深刻总结新中国成立以来正反两方面经验，围绕什么是社会主义、怎样建设社会主义这一根本问题，借鉴世界社会主义历史经验，创立了邓小平理论，解放思想，实事求是，作出把党和国家工作中心转移到经济建设上来、实行改革开放的历史性决策，深刻揭示社会主义本质，确立社会主义初级阶段基本路线，明确提出走自己的路、建设中国特色社会主义，科学回答了建设中国特色社会主义的一系列基本问题，制定了到二十一世纪中叶分三步走、基本实现社会主义现代化的发展战略，成功开创了中国特色社会主义。

After the third plenary session of the 11th Central Committee, Chinese
communists, with Comrade Deng Xiaoping as their chief representative,
united and led the whole Party and the entire nation in conducting a
thorough review of the experience gained and lessons learned since the
founding of the People's Republic. On this basis, and by focusing on the
fundamental questions of what socialism is and how to build it and
drawing lessons from the history of world socialism, they established
Deng Xiaoping Theory, and devoted their efforts to freeing minds and
seeking truth from facts. The historic decision was made to shift the
focus of the Party and the country's work onto economic development and
to launch the reform and opening up drive. Chinese communists brought
the essence of socialism to light, set the basic line for the primary
stage of socialism, and made it clear that China would follow its own
path and build socialism with Chinese characteristics. They provided
sensible answers to a series of basic questions on building socialism
with Chinese characteristics, and formulated a development strategy for
basically achieving socialist modernization by the middle of the 21st
century through a three-step approach. They thus succeeded in founding
socialism with Chinese characteristics.

党的十三届四中全会以后，以江泽民同志为主要代表的中国共产党人，团结带领全党全国各族人民，坚持党的基本理论、基本路线，加深了对什么是社会主义、怎样建设社会主义和建设什么样的党、怎样建设党的认识，形成了"三个代表"重要思想，在国内外形势十分复杂、世界社会主义出现严重曲折的严峻考验面前捍卫了中国特色社会主义，确立了社会主义市场经济体制的改革目标和基本框架，确立了社会主义初级阶段公有制为主体、多种所有制经济共同发展的基本经济制度和按劳分配为主体、多种分配方式并存的分配制度，开创全面改革开放新局面，推进党的建设新的伟大工程，成功把中国特色社会主义推向二十一世纪。

After the fourth plenary session of the 13th Central Committee, Chinese
communists, with Comrade Jiang Zemin as their chief representative,
united and led the whole Party and the entire nation in upholding the
Party's basic theory and line, deepening their understanding of what
socialism is and how to build it, and what kind of party to build and
how to build it. On this basis, they formed the Theory of Three
Represents. In the face of complex domestic and international situations
and serious setbacks confronting world socialism, they safeguarded
socialism with Chinese characteristics, defined building a socialist
market economy as an objective of reform and set a basic framework in
this regard, and established a basic economic system for the primary
stage of socialism under which public ownership is the mainstay and
diverse forms of ownership develop together, as well as an income
distribution system under which distribution according to work is the
mainstay while multiple forms of distribution exist alongside it. They
opened up new horizons for reform and opening up across all fronts and
advanced the great new project of Party building. All these efforts
helped to successfully launch socialism with Chinese characteristics
into the 21st century.

党的十六大以后，以胡锦涛同志为主要代表的中国共产党人，团结带领全党全国各族人民，在全面建设小康社会进程中推进实践创新、理论创新、制度创新，深刻认识和回答了新形势下实现什么样的发展、怎样发展等重大问题，形成了科学发展观，抓住重要战略机遇期，聚精会神搞建设，一心一意谋发展，强调坚持以人为本、全面协调可持续发展，着力保障和改善民生，促进社会公平正义，推进党的执政能力建设和先进性建设，成功在新形势下坚持和发展了中国特色社会主义。

After the 16th National Congress, Chinese communists, with Comrade Hu
Jintao as their chief representative, united and led the whole Party and
the entire nation in advancing practical, theoretical, and institutional
innovation during the process of building a moderately prosperous
society in all respects. They gained a deep understanding of major
questions such as what kind of development to pursue and how to pursue
it under new circumstances, and provided clear answers to these
questions, thus forming the Scientific Outlook on Development. Taking
advantage of an important period of strategic opportunity, they focused
their energy on development, with emphasis on pursuing comprehensive,
balanced, and sustainable development that put the people first. They
worked hard to ensure and improve people's wellbeing, promote social
fairness and justice, bolster the Party's governance capacity, and
maintain its advanced nature. In doing so, they succeeded in upholding
and developing socialism with Chinese characteristics under new
circumstances.

党深刻认识到，开创改革开放和社会主义现代化建设新局面，必须以理论创新引领事业发展。邓小平同志指出，一个党，一个国家，一个民族，如果一切从本本出发，思想僵化，迷信盛行，那它就不能前进，它的生机就停止了，就要亡党亡国。党领导和支持开展真理标准问题大讨论，从新的实践和时代特征出发坚持和发展马克思主义，科学回答了建设中国特色社会主义的发展道路、发展阶段、根本任务、发展动力、发展战略、政治保证、祖国统一、外交和国际战略、领导力量和依靠力量等一系列基本问题，形成中国特色社会主义理论体系，实现了马克思主义中国化新的飞跃。

The Party came to recognize that to open up new prospects for reform,
opening up, and socialist modernization, it needed to steer the
advancement of its endeavors with theoretical innovation. Comrade Deng
Xiaoping once said, "When everything has to be done by the book, when
thinking turns rigid and blind faith is the fashion, it is impossible
for a party or a nation to make progress. Its life will cease and that
party or nation will perish." With this understanding, the Party led and
supported extensive discussions on the criterion for testing truth,
upheld and developed Marxism in light of new practices and the features
of the times, and effectively answered a series of basic questions
regarding socialism with Chinese characteristics, including development
path, stage of development, fundamental tasks, development drivers,
development strategies, political guarantee, national reunification,
diplomacy and international strategy, leadership, and forces to rely on,
thereby forming the theory of socialism with Chinese characteristics and
achieving a new breakthrough in adapting Marxism to the Chinese context.

党的十二大、十三大、十四大、十五大、十六大、十七大，根据国际国内形势发展变化，从我国发展新要求出发，一以贯之对推进改革开放和社会主义现代化建设作出全面部署，并召开多次中央全会专题研究部署改革发展稳定重大工作。党把对外开放确立为基本国策，从兴办深圳等经济特区、开发开放浦东、推动沿海沿边沿江沿线和内陆中心城市对外开放到加入世界贸易组织，从"引进来"到"走出去"，充分利用国际国内两个市场、两种资源。经过持续推进改革开放，我国实现了从高度集中的计划经济体制到充满活力的社会主义市场经济体制、从封闭半封闭到全方位开放的历史性转变。

At its 12th through 17th national congresses, the Party made consistent
overall plans for advancing reform, opening up, and socialist
modernization in view of evolving circumstances at home and abroad and
new requirements for the country's development. The Central Committee
convened several plenary sessions dedicated to planning major
initiatives for promoting reform, development, and stability.

我国改革从农村实行家庭联产承包责任制率先突破，逐步转向城市经济体制改革并全面铺开，确立社会主义市场经济的改革方向，更大程度更广范围发挥市场在资源配置中的基础性作用，坚持和完善基本经济制度和分配制度。党坚决推进经济体制改革，同时进行政治、文化、社会等各领域体制改革，推进党的建设制度改革，不断形成和发展符合当代中国国情、充满生机活力的体制机制。

The introduction of the household contract responsibility system in
rural areas marked the initial breakthrough in China's reform, further
steps were gradually taken to reform the economic structure in the
cities, and reform initiatives were then carried out across the board.
Oriented toward the development of a socialist market economy, this
reform gave greater and broader play to the basic role of market in
allocating resources, while upholding and improving China's basic
economic and income distribution systems. While resolutely advancing
economic structural reform, the Party simultaneously carried out
political, cultural, and social structural reforms as well as
institutional reforms related to Party building, which led to the
formation and development of vigorous institutions and mechanisms that
suited the conditions of contemporary China.

The Party designated opening up as a fundamental national policy. Under
this policy, China progressed from establishing special economic zones
in Shenzhen and a few other areas to opening up more parts of the
country--Pudong in Shanghai, key inland cities as well as areas along
the coastline, borders, the Yangtze River, and major transportation
routes. It also acceded to the World Trade Organization, and went from
"bringing in" to "going global." In this process, we fully utilized both
domestic and international markets and resources.

With continuous progress in reform and opening up, China achieved the
historic transformations from a highly centralized planned economy into
a socialist market economy brimming with vitality, and from a country
that was largely isolated into one that is open to the outside world
across the board.

为了加快推进社会主义现代化，党领导人民进行经济建设、政治建设、文化建设、社会建设，取得一系列重大成就。党坚持以经济建设为中心，坚持发展是硬道理，提出科学技术是第一生产力，实施科教兴国、可持续发展、人才强国等重大战略，推进西部大开发，振兴东北地区等老工业基地，促进中部地区崛起，支持东部地区率先发展，促进城乡、区域协调发展，推进国有企业改革和发展，鼓励和支持发展非公有制经济，加快转变经济发展方式，加强生态环境保护，推动经济持续快速发展，综合国力大幅提升。党坚持党的领导、人民当家作主、依法治国有机统一，发展社会主义民主政治，建设社会主义政治文明，积极稳妥推进政治体制改革，坚持依法治国和以德治国相结合，制定新宪法，建设社会主义法治国家，形成中国特色社会主义法律体系，尊重和保障人权，巩固和发展最广泛的爱国统一战线。党加强理想信念教育，推进社会主义核心价值体系建设，建设社会主义精神文明，发展社会主义先进文化，推动社会主义文化大发展大繁荣。党加快推进以改善民生为重点的社会建设，改善人民生活，取消农业税，不断推进学有所教、劳有所得、病有所医、老有所养、住有所居，促进社会和谐稳定。党提出建设强大的现代化正规化革命军队的总目标，把军事斗争准备的基点放在打赢信息化条件下的局部战争上，推进中国特色军事变革，走中国特色精兵之路。

In an effort to accelerate socialist modernization, the Party led the
people in promoting economic, political, cultural, and social
development and made immense achievements.

The Party continued to take economic development as the central task,
stood by the conviction that development is of paramount importance, and
put forward the notion that science and technology constitute the
primary productive force. It implemented major strategies such as
invigorating China through science and education, pursuing sustainable
development, and developing a quality workforce. It advanced large-scale
development of the western region, revitalized old industrial bases in
the northeast and other regions, promoted the rise of the central
region, and supported the trailblazing development of the eastern region
in an effort to promote the coordinated development of urban and rural
areas and different regions. The Party promoted the reform and
development of state-owned enterprises, encouraged and supported the
development of the non-public sector, and accelerated the transformation
of the economic growth model. It stepped up environmental protection and
promoted sustained and rapid economic development. All of this enabled
China's composite national strength to increase by a large margin.

Upholding the unity between the Party's leadership, the running of the
country by the people, and law-based governance, the Party worked to
develop socialist democracy and promote socialist political progress and
advanced reform of the political system in a proactive and prudent
manner. With a commitment to integrating the rule of law with the rule
of virtue, a new Constitution of the People's Republic of China was
formulated, China built itself into a socialist country under the rule
of law, and a socialist system of laws with Chinese characteristics took
shape. The Party made earnest efforts to respect and protect human
rights and consolidated and developed the broadest possible patriotic
united front.

The Party stepped up education on ideals and convictions, advanced the
development of the core socialist values, promoted cultural-ethical
progress, and fostered an advanced socialist culture, thus pushing
socialist culture to flourish.

The Party accelerated social development with a focus on improving
public wellbeing. It worked to improve people's living standards and
rescinded taxes on agriculture. It devoted constant effort to ensuring
access to education, employment, medical services, elderly care, and
housing and to promoting social harmony and stability.

The Party put forward the overall goal of building a strong, modern, and
standardized revolutionary military, and it made winning local wars in
the information age the focal point in preparation for military
struggle. It advanced military transformation with Chinese
characteristics by following an approach of having fewer but better
troops.

面对风云变幻的国际形势，党毫不动摇坚持四项基本原则，坚决排除各种干扰，从容应对关系我国改革发展稳定全局的一系列风险考验。Facing
a rapidly changing international landscape, the Party upheld the Four
Cardinal Principles, eliminated all kinds of interference, and calmly
responded to a series of risks and trials related to China's overall
reform, development, and stability.

二十世纪八十年代末九十年代初，苏联解体、东欧剧变。由于国际上反共反社会主义的敌对势力的支持和煽动，国际大气候和国内小气候导致一九八九年春夏之交我国发生严重政治风波。党和政府依靠人民，旗帜鲜明反对动乱，捍卫了社会主义国家政权，维护了人民根本利益。The
late 1980s and early 1990s witnessed the demise of the Soviet Union and
the drastic changes in Eastern European countries. In the late spring
and early summer of 1989, a severe political disturbance took place in
China as a result of the international and domestic climates at the
time, and was egged on by hostile anti-communist and anti-socialist
forces abroad. With the people's backing, the Party and the government
took a clear stand against the turmoil, defending China's socialist
state power and safeguarding the fundamental interests of the people.

党领导人民成功应对亚洲金融危机、国际金融危机等经济风险，成功举办二〇〇八年北京奥运会、残奥会，战胜长江和嫩江、松花江流域严重洪涝、汶川特大地震等自然灾害，战胜非典疫情，彰显了党抵御风险和驾驭复杂局面的能力。The
Party led the people in successfully responding to the Asian financial
crisis, the global financial crisis, and other economic risks. We
successfully held the 2008 Olympic and Paralympic Games in Beijing. We
overcame natural disasters, such as severe flooding on the Yangtze,
Nenjiang, and Songhua rivers, the devastating earthquake in Wenchuan,
and the SARS epidemic. All these victories demonstrated the Party's
ability to withstand risks and cope with complicated situations.

党把完成祖国统一大业作为历史重任，为此进行不懈努力。邓小平同志创造性提出"一个国家，两种制度"科学构想，开辟了以和平方式实现祖国统一的新途径。Defining
national reunification as a major historical task, the Party worked
tirelessly to complete it. Comrade Deng Xiaoping introduced the creative
and well-conceived concept of One Country, Two Systems, paving a new
path for achieving reunification through peaceful means.

经过艰巨工作和斗争，我国政府相继对香港、澳门恢复行使主权，洗雪了中华民族百年耻辱。香港、澳门回归祖国后，中央政府严格按照宪法和特别行政区基本法办事，保持香港、澳门长期繁荣稳定。Through
arduous work and struggle, the Chinese government successively resumed
its exercise of sovereignty over Hong Kong and Macao, thus ending a
century-long history of humiliation. Since Hong Kong and Macao's return
to the motherland, the central government acted in strict compliance
with China's Constitution and the basic laws of the special
administrative regions and maintained lasting prosperity and stability
in the two regions.

党把握解决台湾问题大局，确立"和平统一、一国两制"基本方针，推动两岸双方达成体现一个中国原则的"九二共识"，推进两岸协商谈判，实现全面直接双向"三通"，开启两岸政党交流。制定反分裂国家法，坚决遏制"台独"势力、促进祖国统一，有力挫败各种制造"两个中国"、"一中一台"、"台湾独立"的图谋。

Keeping in mind the big picture with regard to resolving the Taiwan
question, the Party set forth the basic principles of peaceful
reunification and One Country, Two Systems and facilitated agreement
across the Taiwan Strait on the 1992 Consensus, which embodies the
one-China principle. It advanced cross-Strait consultations and
negotiations, established comprehensive and direct two-way mail,
transport, and trade links across the Strait, and launched dialogues
between political parties of the two sides. The Party pushed for the
enactment of the Anti-Secession Law, resolutely deterred separatist
forces seeking "Taiwan independence," promoted national reunification,
and thwarted attempts to create "two Chinas," "one China, one Taiwan,"
or "Taiwan independence."

党科学判断时代特征和国际形势，提出和平与发展是当今时代的主题。党坚持维护世界和平、促进共同发展的外交政策宗旨，调整同主要大国的关系，发展同周边国家的睦邻友好关系，深化同广大发展中国家的友好合作，积极参与国际和地区事务，建立起全方位多层次的对外关系新格局。

Based on a judicious assessment of global trends and the features of the
era, the Party put forward the concept that peace and development are
the themes of our times. In line with this concept, China upheld its
fundamental foreign policy goal of preserving world peace and promoting
shared development. It adjusted its relations with other major
countries, developed friendly relations with neighboring countries, and
deepened friendly cooperation with other developing countries. It
actively participated in international and regional affairs and created
a new comprehensive and multi-layered framework for foreign relations.

党积极促进世界多极化和国际关系民主化，推动经济全球化朝着有利于共同繁荣的方向发展，旗帜鲜明反对霸权主义和强权政治，坚定维护广大发展中国家利益，推动建立公正合理的国际政治经济新秩序，促进世界持久和平、共同繁荣。

The Party promoted the development of a multipolar world and the
democratization of international relations and pushed economic
globalization in a direction toward common prosperity. China took an
unequivocal stand against hegemonism and power politics, endeavored to
safeguard the interests of developing countries, worked for a new
international political and economic order that would be fair and
equitable, and promoted lasting peace and common prosperity in the
world.

党始终强调，治国必先治党，治党务必从严，聚精会神抓好党的建设，开创和推进党的建设新的伟大工程。党制定关于党内政治生活的若干准则，健全民主集中制，发扬党内民主，实现党内政治生活正常化；有计划有步骤进行整党，着力解决党内思想不纯、作风不纯、组织不纯问题；按照革命化、年轻化、知识化、专业化方针加强干部队伍建设，大力选拔中青年干部，促进干部队伍新老交替。党围绕解决好提高党的领导水平和执政水平、提高拒腐防变和抵御风险能力这两大历史性课题，以执政能力建设和先进性建设为主线，先后就加强党同人民群众联系、加强和改进党的作风建设、加强党的执政能力建设等重大问题作出决定，组织开展"讲学习、讲政治、讲正气"教育、"三个代表"重要思想学习教育活动、保持共产党员先进性教育活动、学习实践科学发展观活动等集中性学习教育。党把党风廉政建设和反腐败斗争提高到关系党和国家生死存亡的高度，推进惩治和预防腐败体系建设。

The Party has always stressed that to do a good job of governing the
country, we must first do a good job of governing the Party, and that
means governing it strictly. With this in mind, it focused its efforts
on strengthening the Party and launched the great new project of Party
building.

The Party formulated the Code of Conduct for Intraparty Political Life,
strengthened democratic centralism, promoted democracy within the Party,
and normalized intraparty political activities. It launched a party-wide
rectification campaign through a well-planned, step-by-step approach in
order to address the problems of defects in terms of thinking, conduct,
and organization within the Party. The Party also worked to fortify its
ranks with the aim of cultivating younger, more revolutionary, better
educated, and more specialized officials, and it made a strong point of
promoting young and middle-aged officials and advancing the process of
succession.

With a view to addressing the two historical challenges of improving the
Party's leadership and governance and bolstering its ability to resist
corruption, prevent moral decline, and withstand risks, and with its
focus on enhancing its governance capacity and advanced nature, the
Party made a series of decisions on major issues including strengthening
its ties with the people, its style of work, and its governance
capacity. It also carried out education campaigns on the importance of
study, political integrity, and rectitude, on the Theory of Three
Represents, on preserving the advanced nature of Party members, and on
studying and applying the Scientific Outlook on Development. The Party
defined efforts to improve Party conduct, uphold integrity, and combat
corruption as issues concerning the very survival of the Party and the
country, and pushed forward the development of systems for preventing
and punishing corruption.

改革开放四十周年之际，党中央隆重举行庆祝大会，习近平同志发表重要讲话，全面总结四十年改革开放取得的伟大成就和宝贵经验，强调改革开放是党的一次伟大觉醒，是中国人民和中华民族发展史上一次伟大革命，发出将改革开放进行到底的伟大号召。改革开放和社会主义现代化建设的伟大成就举世瞩目，我国实现了从生产力相对落后的状况到经济总量跃居世界第二的历史性突破，实现了人民生活从温饱不足到总体小康、奔向全面小康的历史性跨越，推进了中华民族从站起来到富起来的伟大飞跃。

On the 40th anniversary of the launch of reform and opening up, the
Party held a grand ceremony to mark this important event. In his address
at the ceremony, Comrade Xi Jinping reviewed the great achievements made
and valuable experience accumulated over those four decades. He stressed
that reform and opening up represented a great awakening for the Party
and a great revolution in the history of the Chinese nation's
development, and he called for continued efforts to see this process
through. Our country's impressive achievements in reform, opening up,
and modernization attracted the whole world's attention. China achieved
the historic transformation from a country with relatively backward
productive forces to the world's second largest economy, and made the
historic strides of raising the living standards of its people from bare
subsistence to moderate prosperity in general and then toward moderate
prosperity in all respects. All these achievements marked the tremendous
advance of the Chinese nation from standing up to growing prosperous.

中国共产党和中国人民以英勇顽强的奋斗向世界庄严宣告，改革开放是决定当代中国前途命运的关键一招，中国特色社会主义道路是指引中国发展繁荣的正确道路，中国大踏步赶上了时代。

Through tenacious struggle, the Party and the people showed the world
that reform and opening up was a crucial move in making China what it is
today, that socialism with Chinese characteristics is the correct road
that has led the country toward development and prosperity, and that
China has caught up with the times in great strides.

注：双语部分参考China Daily

https://language.chinadaily.com.cn/a/202111/18/WS6195aa45a310cdd39bc75fe0_1.html
