# 西北地区（the North-western District of China）

<iframe src='https://view.officeapps.live.com/op/embed.aspx?src=https://jihulab.com/wxq/docs/-/raw/main/%E6%A8%A1%E5%9D%97%E4%BA%8C/%E8%A5%BF%E5%8C%97%E5%9C%B0%E5%8C%BA-%E5%B0%8F%E5%AD%A6.pptx' width='100%' height='534' frameborder='0'>
</iframe>

中国西北地区 （the North-western District of
China），又称西北、中国西北、西北地区、西北五省。行政区划上的西北地区包括陕西省、甘肃省、青海省、宁夏回族自治区、新疆维吾尔自治区5个省、自治区。西北地区主要城市有西安、兰州、西宁、银川、乌鲁木齐等。

the North-western District of China is also known as Northwest China or
five provinces Northwest China. In terms of administrative divisions,
the northwest region includes five provinces and autonomous regions:
Shaanxi Province, Gansu Province, Qinghai Province, Ningxia Hui
Autonomous Region, and Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous Region. The major
cities in the northwest region are Xi\'an, Lanzhou, Xining, Yinchuan,
Urumqi and so on.

![查看源图像](media/image1.jpeg){width="3.9923611111111112in"
height="3.310416666666667in"}

西北地区面积广大，约占全国面积的30%，人口约占全国的7.3%。西北地区是中国少数民族主要聚居地区之一，少数民族人口约占全国少数民族总人口的1/3，主要少数民族有回族、维吾尔族、哈萨克族、藏族、蒙古族、俄罗斯族等。

The northwest region is vast, accounting for about 30% of the national
area, with about 7.3% of the national population. The northwest region
is one of the main inhabited areas of minority nationalities in China,
with 1/3 of the total ethnic minority population. The main ethnic
minorities are Hui, Uyghur, Kazakh, Tibetan, Mongolian, Russian and so
on.

西北地区深居中国西北部内陆，具有面积广大、干旱缺水、荒漠广布、风沙较多、生态脆弱、人口稀少、资源丰富、开发难度较大、国际边境线漫长、利于边境贸易等特点。

The northwest region is deeply inland in northwest China and has the
characteristics of a vast area, drought and water shortage, extensive
desert, much wind and sand, fragile ecology, sparse population, rich
resources, difficult development, long international borders, and
favourable border trade.

# 地理风貌（Geography）

## 地形地貌(Topography)

西部地区从东到西自然景观按照大类可分为黄土高原、荒漠草原、戈壁荒漠。

The natural landscapes of the western region can be divided, from east
to west, into loess plateau, desert grassland and Gobi desert.

西部地区地形包括天山山脉、阿尔金山脉、祁连山脉、昆仑山脉、阿尔泰山脉、河西走廊、准噶尔盆地、塔里木盆地、塔克拉玛干沙漠、吐鲁番盆地等山地、盆地、沙漠、戈壁。

The terrain of the western region includes the Tianshan Mountains, the
Argin Mountains, the Qilian Mountains, the Kunlun Mountains, the Altai
Mountains, the Hexi Corridor, the Junggar Basin, the Tarim Basin, the
Taklamakan Desert, the Turpan Basin and other mountains, basins,
deserts, and Gobi.

![](media/image2.jpeg){width="3.75in" height="2.4472222222222224in"}

## 气候环境(Climatic environment)

中国陆地气象地理一级地区区划中的西北地区包括陕西、甘肃、青海、宁夏。

In China\'s first-level land meteorological geography region, the
northwest regions include Shaanxi, Gansu, Qinghai and Ningxia.

西北地区深居内陆，距海遥远，再加上高原、山地地形较高对湿润气流的阻挡，导致本区降水稀少，气候干旱，形成沙漠广袤和戈壁沙滩的景观。西部地区仅东南部少数地区为温带季风气候，其他的大部分地区为温带大陆性气候和高寒气候，冬季严寒而干燥，夏季高温，降水稀少，自东向西呈递减趋势。

The northwest region is deeply inland, far from the sea, coupled with
the high plateau and mountainous terrain to block the humid air flow,
resulting in sparse precipitation， arid climate and a landscape of vast
deserts and Gobi deserts. Only a few regions in the southeast of the
western region have a temperate monsoon climate, and most of the other
regions have a temperate continental climate and an alpine climate, with
severe cold and dry winters, high temperatures in summer, and rare
precipitation, showing a decreasing trend from east to west.

由于气候干旱，气温的日较差和年较差都很大。西北地区大部属中温带和暖温带大陆性气候，局部属于高寒气候。吐鲁番盆地为全国夏季最热的地区。托克逊为全国降水最少的地区。

Due to the arid climate, the daily and annual differences in temperature
are very large. Most of the northwest region has a moderate and warm
temperate continental climate, and a partially alpine climate. The
Turpan Basin is the hottest region in China in summer. Toxon has the
lowest precipitation in the country.

## ![查看源图像](media/image3.jpeg){width="5.768055555555556in" height="4.4430555555555555in"}河流水文(Hydrology)

西部地区的河流多为内流河，其中塔里木河为我国最大的内流河。额尔齐斯河注入北冰洋。渭河，古称渭水，是黄河的最大支流。发源于甘肃省定西市渭源县鸟鼠山，主要流经今甘肃省天水，陕西省咸阳市、西安市。

Most of rivers in the western regions are inland rivers, of which the
Tarim River is the largest inland river in China. The Irtysh River flows
into the Arctic Ocean. The Wei River, known in ancient times as Weishui,
is the largest tributary of the Yellow River.

![](media/image4.jpeg){width="5.768055555555556in"
height="4.316666666666666in"}

西北地区河流和湖泊总体较少，多为内流河湖，主要有以下几个：青海的青海湖，扎陵湖，鄂陵湖，托素湖，察尔汗盐湖等，新疆维吾尔自治区的博斯腾湖，罗布泊（已干涸），阿克赛钦湖，赛里木湖，艾比湖，乌伦古湖，艾丁湖（中国陆地最低点），甘肃省的刘家峡水库等。

There are fewer rivers and lakes in the northwest region, most of which
are inland rivers and lakes.

### 干旱缺水(Drought and lack of water)

降水稀少、气候干旱是西北地区主要的气候特征。

Scarce precipitation and arid climate are the main climatic
characteristics of the northwestern region.

西北地区由于地处亚欧大陆腹地，除秦岭以南地区外大部分地区降水稀少，全年降水量大部分地区在500毫米以下，属大陆性干旱半干旱气候和高寒气候，其中黄土高原年降水量在300～500毫米之间，柴达木盆地在200毫米以下，河西走廊少于100毫米，敦煌只有29.5毫米，吐鲁番不足20毫米，若羌10.9毫米，几乎终年无雨。由于降水稀少、气候干旱、沙漠广布等原因，西北地区的地表水量约为2200亿立方米/年，仅占全国总径流量的8%左右。

Due to its location in the hinterland of Eurasia, most areas except the
south of the Qinling Mountains have little precipitation, and most of
the annual precipitation is below 500 mm. The north-western region
belongs to the continental arid and semi-arid climate and alpine
climate, of which the annual precipitation of the Loess Plateau is
between 300 and 500 mm, the Qaidam Basin below 200 mm, the Hexi Corridor
less than 100 mm, Dunhuang only 29.5 mm, Turpan less than 20 mm, and
Ruoqiang 10.9 mm. Due to the scarcity of precipitation, arid climate,
widespread desert and other reasons, the surface water volume in the
northwest region is about 220 billion cubic meters per year, accounting
for only about 8% of the national total runoff.

干旱缺水是困扰西北地区农业转型发展和乡村振兴的主要障碍之一。作为我国第一个农业"高新区"，陕西杨凌被赋予了建设成为干旱半干旱地区农业科技创新推广核心区的"国家使命"。2017年，杨凌的旱作农业技术在全国示范推广面积达7186.98万亩，示范推广效益212.22亿元。

# 社会习俗(Social customs)

## 饮食风俗(Food custom)

西北一带的饮食风俗显得古朴、粗犷、自然、厚实。

The food custom in the north-western region is simple and natural.

其主食是玉米与小麦并重，也吃其它杂粮，小米饭香甜，油茶脍炙人口，黑米粥、槐花蒸面与黄桂柿子馍更独具风情，牛羊肉泡馍名闻全国。家常食馔多为汤面辅以蒸馍、烙饼或是芋豆小吃，粗料精作，花样繁多，农妇们也有"一面百样吃"、"七十二餐饭食天天新"的本领。

Its staples are corn and wheat, but also eat other grains. In the
north-western region, their millet is tasty, their oil tea is popular,
their black rice porridge, their locust flower steamed noodles and
yellow osmanthus persimmon steamed bun is unique, and their beef and
mutton steamed bun is famous throughout the country. Home-cooked food is
mostly soup noodles supplemented by steamed buns, flapjacks or taro
snacks. Simple ingredients are used exquisitely. and peasant women also
have the skills of \"eating noodles in one hundred ways\" and \"cooking
different meals for seventy-two day\".

受气候环境和耕作习惯限制，食用青菜甚少，农家用膳常是饭碗大而菜碟小，一年四季有油泼辣子、细盐、浆水（用老菜叶泡制的醋汁）和蒜瓣亦足矣。如有客人造访或宰羊，或杀鸡，或炒几碟肉丝、鸡蛋、苜蓿，擀细面，蒸白馍，也相当丰盛。

Limited by the climatic environment and farming habits, there are very
few green vegetables eaten by people there. Local peoples often eat more
rice and less vegetables. It is enough for local people there, to have
red chillies with oil, fine salt, slurry water (vinegar juice made with
old vegetable leaves) and garlic all year round. If guests visit, they
will slaughter sheep, or kill chickens, or cooked a few dishes of
shredded meat, eggs, alfalfa, or roll out thin noodles, or steamed white
buns, which can also be quite hearty.

![](media/image5.jpeg){width="3.9166666666666665in"
height="2.341666666666667in"}

## 建筑特点(Architectural features)

### 窑洞(Cave dwelling)

窑洞是中国北部黄土高原上居民的古老居住形式。在中国陕甘宁地区，黄土层非常厚，有的厚达几十米，中国人民创造性利用高原有利的地形，凿洞而居，创造了被称为绿色建筑的窑洞建筑

Cave dwellings are an ancient form of habitation for residents on the
Loess Plateau in northern China. In the Shaanxi-Gansu-Ningxia region of
China, the loess layer is very thick, some of which up to tens of meters
thick. The Chinese people creatively use the favourable terrain of the
plateau to dig caves and create cave buildings, which are called green
buildings.

中国的窑洞民居在形式上分为三类：

Chinese cave dwellings are formally divided into three categories:

1.  靠崖式窑洞（崖窑）：是在山坡、土塬的沟崖地带挖一口窑，平着伸进去前面有比较开阔的平川地，从侧面看，这种地形很像靠背椅的形式。

First, the cliff cave (cliff kiln): it is a kiln dug on the hillside,
the trench cliff area of the earthen mound, with relatively open flat
space inside. Looked from the side, this terrain is very similar to the
form of a back chair.

![](media/image6.jpeg){width="3.8256944444444443in" height="3.85625in"}

![](media/image7.png){width="5.768055555555556in"
height="3.8569444444444443in"}

2.  下沉式窑洞（地窑）：是在平地上向下挖，挖成一个凹的大院子，再向这个院子四周挖窑洞，这种窑洞从远处看不到，就像是平地一样，只有走近才能看到地上一个个的凹坑，向坑里一看，下面是一户户的人家。正因为如此，下沉式窑洞是最为奇特的一种。

> Sunken cave (ground kiln): it is a kiln dug down from the flat ground,
> turning itself into a large concave yard. And then caves around the
> yard are dug. This kind of cave cannot be seen from a distance,
> because it just likes the flat ground. Only after getting closer, can
> people see the pits on the ground. Looking into the pit, people can
> see families below. Because of this, the sunken cave is the most
> peculiar one.

![](media/image8.jpeg){width="5.768055555555556in"
height="3.2604166666666665in"}

![](media/image9.jpeg){width="5.768055555555556in"
height="3.8333333333333335in"}

3.  独立式窑（箍窑）：是在地上用砖砌成一个窑洞式的房子，是窑洞中最高级的一种，也是建筑造价最高的一种，实际上就是现代建筑中的覆土建筑。独立式窑洞和挖的窑洞室内感觉是一样的。上面是拱券，后墙不开窗，但房前设檐廊，檐廊和窑洞的门窗是装饰的重点。

> Free-standing kiln (hoop kiln): it is a cave house made of bricks on
> the ground, which is the most advanced kind of cave kiln, and the most
> expensive type. In fact, it is actually a covered building in modern
> architecture. The interiors of free-standing caves are same as digging
> cave ones. There is the arch above, and there are no windows on the
> back wall, but there is eave galleries in front of the house. The
> eaves galleries and the door as well as windows of the cave are the
> focus of the decoration.

![](media/image10.jpeg){width="5.768055555555556in"
height="3.5631944444444446in"}![](media/image11.jpeg){width="5.768055555555556in"
height="3.8333333333333335in"}

### 民歌

民歌是人类文化中宝贵的一个组成部分。它源于人民的生活，充分反映了人民的生活，也广泛而深入地影响着人民的生活。因此，马克思说："民歌是唯一的历史传说和编年史"。

Folk songs are a valuable part of human culture. It originates from the
people\'s lives, fully reflects the people\'s lives, and also has a
broad and deep impact on the people\'s lives. Thus, Marx said: \"Folk
songs are the only historical legends and chronicles\".

西北民歌是指流行在陕西、山西、甘肃、宁夏、青海、内蒙古中、西部等省区的民歌。其中以"花儿"和"信天游"最具代表性。

Northwest folk songs refer to folk songs popular in Shaanxi, Shanxi,
Gansu, Ningxia, Qinghai, central and western Inner Mongolia. Among them,
\"Flowers\" and \"XintianYou\" are the most representative ones.

"花儿"是流行在青海、甘肃、宁夏的一种山歌。其基本特点是：旋律高亢、悠长，多用假声或真假声结合的方法演唱。

\"Flower\" is a kind of folk song popular in Qinghai, Gansu and Ningxia.
Its basic characteristics are: having high-pitched and long melody, and
mostly sung by false voice or the combination of true and false sounds.

"信天游"是流行在陕西、甘肃、宁夏的一种山歌。其旋律有两种类型：一种是节奏自由，旋律高亢辽阔、起伏较大的；另一种是节奏工整、结构严谨、旋律平稳、表达感情较为细腻的。信天游是一部用老镢镌刻在西北黄土高原上的传世巨著，这是黄坡黄水之间的一朵奇葩。一曲高歌，响遏行云，全扫靡靡之音；一声入耳，荡气回肠，令人精神为之一振。

\"XintianYou\" is a kind of folk song popular in Shaanxi, Gansu and
Ningxia. There are two types of melodies: one is free rhythmic,
high-pitched, and full of ups and downs; the other is neat rhythmic,
having rigorous structure, stable melodies, and the delicate expression
of feelings.
